grief and outrage in texas after a white
police officer fatally shot
an african-american woman inside her own
home
on police body cam video an officer is
seen approaching a door of jefferson's
home in fort worth
the screen door is closed the solid door
is open
and the lights are on inside the officer
walks the perimeter of the house
then as he approaches a window put your
hands up
the officer had fired within only a
couple of seconds after shouting his
verbal command
and never did he identify himself as
police
tatiana jefferson 28 years old died on
the spot
in her bedroom early saturday morning
this has happened again and i think a
big factor for a lot of people that i'm
seeing online
is that this woman was just inside her
home playing video games with her nephew
it makes you not want to reach out and
call law enforcement if you think
something like this is going to happen
it has to be admitted right off the top
that the left-wing critique of black
lives matter
is [ __ ] yes i said it of course the
right-wing critique of blm is [ __ ]
that's no surprise to anyone
basically what the right wing says is
that it's some conspiracy set up by
george soros etc
but the left-wing critique also is
[ __ ]
for the most part what you find on the
far left
the group of people complaining that
black lives matter is
not marxist enough not socialist enough
not anti-capitalist enough that it's
implicitly or secretly
a pro-capitalist movement yes yes once
again
the left-wing claims it's secretly
orchestrated by george soros just trying
to get mainstream corporate democrats
re-elected you know who that means in
the year 2020
that that's all this is there is a
left-wing critique
of blm that is just as awful
as the right wing critique but between
the two you'll notice one
interesting difference the right wing
complains that black lives matter is
implicitly or secretly
marxist whereas the left wing
is complaining that the problem is
they're not marxist enough
or not marxist at all so it took some
time and did some research
into what are the intellectual sources
of the black lives matter movement
and there are some positive surprises
there is good news and bad
but i'm happy to say i actually do have
some good news in this video and one
good book
to recommend both for the history and
the future
of black lives matter
[Applause]
[Music]
in this video we're dealing with two
books attached to
four very different political
personalities
and myriad possibilities for the future
of black
lives matter as a movement each of them
linked in a dynamic way to the
reevaluation
of african americans radicalism
in the past so book one here is called
revolution
in the air and this has a forward by
alicia garza if you don't know who
alyssia garza is
she is the co-founder of black lives
matter she has her own podcast she has
her own twitter
she is as much the leader and face of
voice of black lives matter as anyone
else can be
she's one of the first names you're
gonna find if you're googling around
trying to figure out
who is black lives matter who defines
what this movement was
is and ought to be now this book
revolution the air is a reevaluation of
and a re-valorization of black
communism so it's looking back to
communists
and marxists in the united states of
america primarily in the 1960s
and 1970s and then naturally it's
drawing conclusions
about their failure because that
movement was a failure
and looking forward to the future and
what's very interesting to note is that
alicia garza
in the introduction has the honesty to
really reflect
that when she first discovered this book
she was a young aspiring radical a young
aspiring revolutionary
political organizer she did not find in
the pages of this book at
all the answers that she was looking for
and now a new generation of young black
revolutionaries intellectuals etc are
going to be discovering this book partly
because alicia garza's name is on the
cover and she wrote the introduction
and they also are not going to find the
answers that they're looking for
the very fundamental question that this
book sort of asks
and then refuses to answer we'll see in
just a moment what alicia says i
appreciate her honesty
in the introduction but she can only be
honest up to a point the fundamental
question is
wasn't it a tragic awful mistake
for these african-americans who are only
a tiny tiny minority
of black people understands america
wasn't it a tragic and awful mistake
for them to try to attach their dreams
of a better future
to stalin mao zedong
lenin and even karl marx wouldn't they
have been better off
drawing inspiration from any other
source imaginable
now the second book i'm going to mention
here which again even a quick google
search you're very likely to find this
named as the main
um i don't know intellectual touchstone
for or locus classicus for what's going
on in black lives matter today
is a book titled black marxism
the single greatest surprise about this
book is that of course people
buy it they look at the cover they
assume that because the title is
black marxism the implicit thesis of
this
is going to be that black people ought
to be marxists or that it's going to be
an african-american approach to marxism
that's fundamentally
pro-marx and it's not this
book is a brilliant and highly erudite
demolition of marxism it completely
destroys the intellectual legacy of karl
marx
and it does so in a in an elegant and
fascinating way
it's a great read i've only read the
first two chapters i'll probably read
the rest of it the next few weeks
but let me tell you something the
chapter one alone
really could be a standalone book the
style
of cedric robinson is such that it
absolutely
presumes you are the type of highly
erudite reader
who recognizes the name ali piren that
you're someone who has already
read on repeat that you're in a very
very high level of
sophistication and education to uh to
appreciate this
he assumes you're someone who's already
well versed in
and even a little bit bored with the
academic fad of
world systems theory it so rapidly
goes through the whole history of i was
going to say the western world but it's
it's most of the world frankly in the
first chapter
that in an era before the invention of
wikipedia
it's very difficult to imagine uh a
teenager or even someone in their 20s
being able to sit down and appreciate
this book because there are so many
things you'd have to google you'd have
to look up on wikipedia you'd even have
to
find a map for that are dealt with
rapidly
and again this book much like black
lives matter itself it ended up not
having any audience to appreciate it
during the author's lifetime the author
just recently died i believe in 2016.
but during the author's lifetime he
alienated himself because people who
really
know marxism they figure out soon enough
that this book is actually profoundly
hostile to marx
even though it states its conclusions in
these kind of
elegant and erudite ways he'll say
things like
in the 19th century all of these facts
were misinterpreted
as heroic narratives of the so-called
working class were constructed
so this sort of thing he doesn't
directly say karl marx and his work is
garbage
but if you know marx already if you
don't understand marx and marxism if
you're at a high level of education in
that area
you know these are really zingers this
is you know
this really has a lot of verve to it the
way he's just you know
giving kind of backhanded slaps to the
whole tradition of marxism
indeed he's making orthodox marxists
look like a laughingstock look like
fools now he does not do that for no
reason
one of the recurring elements here both
in the appreciation of
senator robinson's black marxism and in
the left-wing denunciation of black
lives matter as a movement today
one of the factors is the marxist
commitment
to class struggle and class analysis
only
which leads them to and really this is
just insane
it leads them to dismiss any discussion
of
race racism and even nationality and
nationalism it leads them to dismiss all
of that as
so-called false consciousness some of
you may have heard and even joked about
this phrase
no struggle but the class struggle well
orthodox marxists take that tremendously
seriously
and it leads them to insist that race
really isn't important at all obviously
in the history the united states of
america raises important
and what cedric shows cedric robinson
shows in chapter one of this
is no slavery wasn't new racism wasn't
new
let's really talk using a lot of the
language
of world systems theory let's really
talk about how the
system of european colonialism developed
and european industrialization developed
going all the way back to ancient greece
and rome let's really point to the
profound continuities
you know and he does make really useful
comparisons between
racism against jews anti-semitism and
racism against blacks
he talks about the way in which racism
against the irish
in england was co-evil with the
emergence
of the plantation economy um the
creation of plantations really the the
colonization or recolonization of
ireland
by the english going on concurrently
with the colonization of places like
virginia
you can already tell just from these
these little snippets of the book i'm
alluding to here
this is a very dense very factual uh
you know profound reevaluation of
history that is coming to the conclusion
that probably everyone in this audience
shares
yes race matters yes racism matters
yes this was a crucial component of what
happened
in the history of europe in the history
of north america the caribbean south
america
and this is however not the only thing
that is profoundly wrong with marxism
so what this book moves on to do in the
later chapters that i
admittedly haven't read yet is he goes
on also to examine
some of the black revolutionary leaders
or i guess you could say would be
revolutionary leaders intellectual
leaders people like
uh uh du bois so in proper french his
name is dubois
but his preferred pronunciation was
dubois w.b du bois
uh you know he became a card
card-carrying communist he had a complex
relationship company that was a
african-american black leader who became
a communist naturally the black
communist party and black congress
was tried to make a hero of him and what
he's really showing is you know in the
first say
first half of the book he shows you that
marxism is completely the wrong
theory for african americans and
africans in africa
and south america and uh the caribbean
he's interested in the asp the
the black diaspora as well as both staff
it's like well marxism is completely the
wrong theory
it's asking the wrong questions and
giving us the wrong answers and then he
moves on to the critique of particular
black leaders like this black leaders
who are often just
uncritically adulated uh in the 20th
century and
in the 21st century even more it says
hey look here are all the ways that they
were wrong here are all the ways that
they were led into a terrible dead end
because they blindly followed marxism so
another one of his little erudite
you know twists of the pen that are you
know just as cutting as a
twist of the knife is that he says well
you know um
these abstract concepts that the
marxists are are addicted to
you know um they began as our servants
but soon enough they became our masters
you know some of the abstract reasoning
that marxists engaged in it was
kind of useful up to a point but they
they got it they let it get out of
control
and at this point marxists are lying
about history and misrepresenting
history
to make history fit their ideological
and political narrative to suit their
political purposes
and he's saying look that's not the real
history of the world at all
marxism has become like a cult of lying
about history
and that doesn't tell us anything
meaningfully about the past present or
future
of black radicalism black revolutionary
movements
so this leads him into discussing i
guess in the middle part of the book
uh at least i'm just discussing that's
always been fascinating to me
actual historical black revolutions
rebellions slave revolts and
independence movements
that strangely seem to get overlooked i
mean all the attention is on someone
like dr martin luther king jr but
there's remarkably little interest
in for example the revolution in haiti
the various revolutions and slave
revolts and the existence of
maroon communities so slaves that broke
away and basically like had their own
colony or their own community
partly just due to escaping from a slave
plantations but also rebelling against
and burning down slave mandates then
going to live separately in the
mountains
looking at that seriously and saying
okay you want to talk about black
radicalism you want to talk about
revolutions
let's get rid of all this marxist
[ __ ] let's learn from the real
history let's look at what actually
happened
when the slaves rose up and killed their
masters so black marxism
is a completely brilliant and genuinely
inspiring book
written by a guy you know i've got to
say this is like
the most impressive book i can remember
reading
from a modern american period
it's very very rare to encounter a book
with this level of every edition
scholarship and also just verve and
tenacity it's a fun
read unfortunately it requires
an unbelievably high level of education
on the part of the reader like i felt
like i was marshaling and drawing to the
fore
like my own decades of scholarship on a
whole crazy variety of chapters of
history and politics
right i was like oh yeah right uh angry
piranha oh yeah right world systems
theory oh yeah right
the history of the english civil war and
the french civil war and napoleon and
i've done my own reading about the
history of slavery and all those things
too
this is really asking you to kind of uh
explore your your own intellectual
resources while you're reading it just
to keep up
and if you were reading this as a kind
of optimistic
would-be young black revolutionary or
activist
i can imagine how profoundly alienated
would be just because
of how demanding it is of the reader but
then above and beyond that
sooner or later as readers are going
through this they're going to realize
despite the title black marxism
is itself an anti-marxist
book
[Music]
we now return to alicia garza and her
introduction
to revolution in the air quote my first
reading of revolution the air
left me profoundly confused as a young
organizer i read this book as if each
page
should contain a ready-made solution to
the challenges i was grappling with
how could we build a million strong
movement when our organization
and those we work closely with only
engaged hundreds
could anything be done to close the gap
between paid staff organizers
and the membership of organizations who
were largely working class
people of color of course this approach
was misguided
but certainly fit the stage of
development that i was in i hadn't yet
spent enough time building the movement
to understand its nuances
i hadn't yet studied much of the origins
of marx selena's tradition
that i was loosely trained in i made it
all the way through the first part and
then skimmed the rest
i'll come back to it i said to myself we
can and must make a commitment to
learning new lessons
and more specifically making new
mistakes
i'm still struck by how many of the
endeavors described in this book
are things that i and my peers have done
or experienced so to be clear she's
saying that it's remarkable for her
that in reading about the errors of
black
communism african-american marxism in
the 1960s and 1970s
she's struck by how many of these
mistakes are the same mistakes she and
her peers made
more recently than the year 2000 this
would have been in the 2000s she's
talking about
make no mistake there will never be a
successful internationalist left in the
united states
if we cannot learn from mistakes that
have been plaguing us for decades
staying grounded in the actual material
conditions while reaching for the sky
though a measure of revolutionary
romanticism was involved for some
most of those who quote turned to lenin
mao
and che probed and studied before making
this life-changing decision
they concluded that third world marxism
embodied the most penetrating insights
into the working of u.s society
that u.s style racism capitalism and
empire building
were structurally and historically
intertwined that quote the wretched of
the earth close quote
people of color at home and abroad would
have to be at the center
if the world was to be transformed the
new communist movement was their attempt
decisively shaped by dominant
perspectives in the international left
of the time
to turn these insights into a practical
political force to join together as
comrades across barriers of race
nationality gender and age
to sink roots among workers and the
oppressed now i have just added the
comment
and it utterly failed even if we only
compare it to the nation of islam
it was a failure there were actually
many highly eccentric
african-american political movements in
the same period
60s 70s and 80s like including even like
the black hebrew israelites
various black nationalists black
separatist movements
but obviously the nation of islam that
in case you didn't know
had malcolm x as its main leader and uh
you know public figure for quite a few
years there he later broke away from it
of course
uh you know the nation of islam that
also had a famous boxer you might have
heard of cassius clay
changed his name to be uh muhammad ali
muhammad ali promoted nation of islam
there were failures that were
nevertheless vastly more successful
than black communism or black marxism so
i appreciate alyssia's
honesty here in as much as she's capable
of being honest about it
however this fundamentally remains i
mean the introduction of this book and i
would say the book as a whole
and one dangerous aspect of black lives
matter in
2020 remains you know this kind of
stubborn attempt
to revalorize and romanticize the
failures of marxism the failures of
communism instead of just coming out
honestly and saying look guys
this failed this was a total failure
compared even to
something as obvious as you know the
poor people's movement
that was briefly led by dr martin luther
king jr
coming of age in the utopian climate of
the 1960s
embracing a marxism leninism billed as
an all but initiate science
these young militants thought they could
fast forward history
through hard work and adherence to
correct ideas
throughout the whole introduction she
indicates that she is really sick and
tired
of the puritanical attitudes the
holier-than-thou attitudes of marxists
and communists i guess she's lived
around
a lot of them long enough to know and
probably she's heard some of the same
criticisms i mentioned at the start of
this video people claiming that she's
not a marxist at all or not a real
marxist
that she's secretly pro-capitalist or
that any discourse about race and racism
is just quote-unquote
false consciousness the allegations that
she's just a tool of the mainstream
democrat party all that stuff is being
flung at her from the far left
all the time she is sick and tired of
the puritanical attitudes she encounters
in marxism and communism
however she is not quite willing to let
go of this label
marxist yet she's not willing to just
recognize historically
communism was a failure on a massive
scale in russia
in china in laos and vietnam in cuba et
cetera
she's not willing to recognize that but
she's also not willing to recognize that
it's been a failure
on the tiny scale of the horrible effect
it had in the lives of the people who
believed in it most
uh in the united states of america
flexibility openness
generosity of spirit and a democratic
culture of respect for every individual
are indispensable
footnote also all of those things are
not
marxist again she's not quite willing to
come out of the closet and say she's
against marxism
maybe ten years from now maybe five
years from now she'll really re-evaluate
this
and make a clear statement about where
her own you know feelings lie
but flexibility opens generosity of
spirit and
a democratic culture in the rights of
the individual
none of that is in the marxist canon
none of that no none of those are the
attitudes
cultivated by members of the so-called
communist vanguard
quite the contrary quote one of the most
counterproductive and painful features
of the new communist movement was its
tendency to mistake toughness for
commitment
rigidity for steadfastness attacks on
other leftists
for adherence to principle to construct
a welcoming and sustaining political
culture
rooted in the american experience it
would be wise to look beyond the marxist
pantheon
and learn all we can from the towering
intellectual moral and political
contributions
of dr martin luther king now with that
statement
of course i agree but this leaves us
with the open question of how marxist
or how anti-marxist is black lives
matter
i think the most honest answer you can
give is
twofold related to the two different
leaders
of the black lives matter room the two
different founders who are now
most vocally stepping up to represent
that movement giving interviews to
tv news stations and on their twitter
and social media so
and so forth i think we can say that
alicia garza
remains uh profoundly ambivalent
about the history of marxism and is very
unsure
of what marxism will mean for the future
of black radical activism
however she's not quite willing to part
ways with it she's not quite willing to
face up to
the failures of the past and it seems to
me that her main
sort of creative response to what she
dislikes about or even what she despises
about
communists and marxists whom she's known
and collaborated with for many many
years
is to embrace this very informal
very folksy very chatty very
personable style of politics
the podcast i just heard from her she
describes
how she uh drinks hard liquor
at the end of a hard day she makes jokes
about uh going to the hairdresser
and hair and nails and beauty products
she's really making this kind of
conscious effort to overthrow
um the militancy that you know isn't
just associated with
marxist revolutionaries but you know
it's associated with the whole of the
heart lab
she's really trying to say that no
that's not the way she's going to do
politics
and obviously i have a very informal
style here on youtube i can't remember
the last time i had a scripted video
or even made a list of bullet points on
paper nothing was written down for this
youtube video it's off top in my head
i also embrace informal politics to some
extent however
i think the more you examine what's
going on today in 2020 with black lives
matter
the more you might appreciate the
significance of having
party discipline of having a party
manifesto
of having things that define exactly
what the movement is
and what it isn't and not just to rely
on people
having an appealing personality and
chit-chatting uh
you know on youtube in their podcasts
and
relying on goodwill and cooperation
arising out of
messages back and forth over twitter it
does indeed start to seem a little bit
bourgeois decadent and self-indulgent
speaking of which let's for the first
time in this video take a brief look at
what
patrice clore the other uh founder
co-founder of black lives matter has
been doing with her newfound fame
yes that's right artist organizer and
freedom fighter
never forget that the word artist is
their
first and foremost and i i drew
attention before to how peculiar it is
that her
university degree earned just a few
years ago at ucla
how peculiar it was that she chose to
study religion
in university um rather than selling
related to her
political activism but we can also say
it's a little bit strange that she
didn't study something more directly
related to her
so-called art what is her art no
it's not painting no it's not drawing no
she can't play the trombone she puts
on performances like this in which she
is
completely naked aside from gold paint
all over her body
and stands around in a field a recurring
element of her performance art seems to
be her
lying down in a bathtub and i think if
you just examine the expressions
on the faces of the people in the crowd
here you can imagine
how awkward you might feel if um you had
to attend
this particular type of performance art
from the co-founder of
black lives matter here's her artist's
statement on one of these performances
quote as a black queer woman living
inside a world that is constantly trying
to kill me
respite reprieve and healing and evening
of cleansing
is my latest work for my 2019 thesis
solo show
yes so the idea is that the cleansing
here
is both metaphorical and literal
as she is lying in a bathtub
so in looking at
the highly diffuse and decentralized
phenomena of black lives matter people
who are looking for some kind of
philosophical or
intellectual basis for what it was
what it is and what it will be
they will be left with much of the same
strange ambivalence and confusion
that alicia garza expresses in the
introduction that book
there will be some people on the left
who are now looking towards blm
hopefully as if this is going to bring
about the revival of marxism the united
states of america perhaps specifically a
revival of
black marxism as the title of the book
says
but could this instead be a moment to
look back on this history
the same history that max elbaum writes
about in revolution in the air
and that robinson writes about in black
marxism could this be an opportunity to
look back at those mistakes
and just frankly admit yeah those were
mistakes this was the wrong road
that black radicals went down in the
1960s and 1970s and we can't even
imagine
how much better off african americans
the united states might be today
if they hadn't gone down this road if
they'd taken any other path to progress
if they'd taken any other path to
pursuit of say you know reforming the
democracy you're a part of and really
improving it
rather than engaging in frankly
accelerationist fantasies
of a violent revolution that would uh
you know drag the united states down
further
to be something more like vietnam or
cambodia
when i first criticized black lives
matter
years ago i pointed out the weaknesses
in their constitution
and that constitution has now been
deleted from the internet
they're a movement that has chosen to
refuse
to define itself as a movement they
first emerged as merely a
hashtag as a catchphrase and the
question is
can they become something more better
bigger
can they change the history of the world
or are they just going to be a fad
loosely inspired by a hashtag and a
catchphrase
i think that is a tremendous challenge
for the uh
founders and the leaders of black lives
matter's movement and i think it leaves
people including
people in this audience right now
googling around
wondering what can i read or what rock
do i have to look under
to figure out the intellectual and
philosophical basis of what this thing
is
and what its potential in the future can
be the answer to the question
is black lives matter a marxist movement
is maybe because they've utterly refused
to define themselves
in this way they've utterly refused to
provide us with a constitution or a
manifesto
or a clear sense of direction purpose
the goals they're trying to achieve what
they are and are not willing to do to
get there
i think the question could instead be
asked as follows
are marxists powerful enough to co-opt
and take over black lives matter as a
movement
and in the year 2020 my bet is
nah